From hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman it's
Oh, weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number three 90 recorded live
Thursday, September 12th, 2013. This episode of
Hansel minutes is brought to
you by Tellerik offering the
best in developer tools and
support online@tlerikdotcomandbyfranklin.net to makers of
gesture, pack a powerful gesture,
recording and recognition system for
Microsoft connect for windows developers
details@gesturepak.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Franz Bauma about
the state of object relational
mappers in.net. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes, and
I'm talking to France, Bauma,
author of LLB, L Jen,
and a expert on data
access. How are you? Hey
man. Thank you. Thanks for
having me. No, this is
great. It's always good to
talk to experts and I
I'm happy to talk to
you. I haven't seen you
in person in a long
time, but we're, we're joined
on Skype here. So this
is great. I wanted to
talk to you because you
have a, you're a consultant
with a product of your
own, right? It's just it's
you. It's one guy. It's
not a team of 50
people who work on this
product. Is it always with
me developing the product and
to support guys who are
doing this sport for me?
And it's very, it's very
mature. This has been around
for years. You've been doing
this for how long now
I started developing it in
late 2002 and released the
first version in September, 2003. So
it's about 10 years now.
Wow. It's on the market.
So it's, it's interesting because
while people have been talking
in.net about what the right
way to access relational data
is, there's been this kind
of ongoing argument about what
do I use linked to
SQL? Oh no, you can't
that's dead. Or do I
use N hibernate? That's the,
that's the all.net thing to
do? Or do I use
entity framework? That's the official
Microsoft way to do you
actually have chosen to float
above that kind of a
as, as an, as an
abstract mapping layer and you
support all of those and
your own framework? Yes. Well,
first I supported my own
framework, but as we are
in commercial product and as
the framework, and then hibernate
are free as well as
linked to sequel, we have
to compete against the free
product, which is very hard.
So additionally to that, lots
of people wanted Boko classes
to be resistant to the
database. And we don't support
Bobo, glosses, poco, meaning plain
old CLR objects for people
that don't know. So to
them with An alternative, but
still enable them to do
the best data access in
that project. I thought, well,
what if I support the
other main or mappers in
my designer and also do
model first? And so I
chose these three links, sequel
and hibernate, and an entity
framework to support them as
a, as well. The system
is flexible so I can
decide to support another one
tomorrow. I, if I answered
And you know how entity
framework though says, you can
do things code first or
design first or model first,
have you picked one? I
mean, by, by having people
start with a designer as
a that's how you do
it, you don't have code
first, right? I don't have
COVID first. No. I started
with database first, so pointed
to a database. It will
read all the table definitions,
few definitions and so forth
and reverse engineer and abstract
entity model from that at
the level of Niamh, ORM
object, rolling and generate code
from the, from that abstract
model and the mappings. So,
but a lot of people
said, well, I want to
start with a clean slate.
I want, I don't have
a database and I want
to define a model and
generate code from it and
the database or additionally, I
have a database, but I
want to make changes on
that database, but not in
a way that they used
to be, to do like
change the table here, change
a fuel back, but in
a more structured manner, like
I want to change. It's
in a real model, that's
behind everything. So that's the
reason I added model first
to the kind of designer.
So people have a choice
between starting from scratch or
maintain the model in a
model first fashion, or simply
pointed to the database, pull
the relational model data, and
then go from there. Do
you think the developers, perhaps,
maybe developers that are just
getting started, get confused about
what exactly it is that
they're persisting. Like do you
think that they think that
their databases store objects? I
think they do a lot
of developers and what they
see everyday is their code
and then objects like a
user object or customer object
in their own application. And
it has to be persistent
somewhere. So what they want
is, okay, I tell some,
some other object to persist
this customer or these orders.
And so I can get
them back later and the
less friction they can get
with that action, the better.
And there's something to say
for that. The only thing
is they are not storing
objects, they're storing data. And
today that can be stored
in a different format in
a database because other applications
have to consume the data
again in another forum, like
for example, a report server
or old website, a website
has to display the information
in a different form, but
that's totally abstract away from
the developer if they simply
see the objects in their
application. So how important do
you think it is that
when someone is, is working
with an Orr mapper, that
they need to really know
what's going on? Because I
feel like a lot of
work has been put into
trying to hide the fact
that we're putting objects in
databases and then other other
products feel really strongly about
making it clear that these
are just projections that we're,
that we're working with. Well,
I don't have raw numbers,
but the, what I've read
in most research is that
a lot of time is
spent in the database like
40% or some in most
applications. So if you just
do as if the database
isn't there, it's just one
method call. And then you
realize how important, how big
the impact will be when
you just save like 10,000
objects into the database. For
example, Because it's just being
hidden. Like, they'll just say
here's a list of objects
and they don't realize what
that turns into. Yes. Like
for example, when you see
people query tens of thousands
of objects to find one,
for example, to update and
then send the whole set
back to the database because
they don't realize how big
the work will be on
the other side. And how
does, how does this start?
What is it that made
people forget that these things
happen? I mean, back in
the day when I was
going and writing SQL and,
and frankly, when I was
a string concatenating SQL together,
I may have been breaking
rules by string concatenate SQL,
but I sure knew when
it was an object and
when it wasn't, Well, I
think it started when, when
people realized that you can
do a lot of work
in a couple of lines
of code. So that makes
people think, Hey, I can
do a lot of things
together and I can create
this. I can create this.
And I get a couple
of objects back and I
looked through them and I
see changed some property, a
save it back, Hey man,
work done. Let's move on
to the next work item.
As soon as you see
that, that, that you can
do a lot of work
with a couple of lines,
you don't realize anymore what's
beneath the surface. I think
it's the same thing with,
for example, when you write
your first webpage and asp.net,
you don't realize how much
code is generated behind that
page to actually render the
page. You're, you've written in
a couple of lines. So
unless you realize how much
work is actually going on
at one time, you will
sooner or later make the
mistake that you think your
code is fast. But it
isn't. I feel like we,
as an industry are kind
of oscillating back and forth
between hide lots of things
and be, be powerful and
be productive. And then we,
we get panicky after a
little while, and then we
switched back, like we were
doing web forms, and now
we're talking about Nancy and
web API. We were doing
a linked to sequel. And
now we're talking about things
like dapper and massive where
people say, Oh, just learn
SQL. That's the right way
to do things. How do
you as a product that's
been around for 10, 11
years deal with those oscillations
because peop some people are
moving us towards these micro
frameworks where they say less,
Yeah. In one way you
have to make a choice.
Like, will I support a
different set of features like
Debra, like features, for example,
where you can just write
a sample query that's very
fast, but obviously has less
features around it or do
I say, well, if you
want to use or use
dapper and I'm stick with
the feature set and the
road I I've chosen, and
this is always easy to,
to, to make these changes,
these choices. What I'm seeing
now for example, is that
the, a lot of people
will use read only databases,
for example, like a no
SQL database de-normalized schema, as
for read only parts of
their application. And I'm thinking
about adding functionality that you
can create sub models from
your real model to create
these pre only projections. So
you can, for example, say
I have a customer order,
order details, product kind of
relationship abstract model, right? And
I create a projection from
net like a customer and
order in one set. And
I define that on the
model. So my designer can
generate code for you to
keep that in sync. So
you just have a protection
system on your customer and
order, and the system I
generate for you will keep
automatically your read only sets
in sync with that. Would,
would it be fair to
call that read only set
of you model? Are you
getting, are you basically putting
in view model support? Yeah,
for example. Okay. So the
advantage obviously is that when
your review model changes, your
read only mode changes with
it. So you don't have
to go back and forth.
Hey, I changed something in
here. Oh, I have to
change the, also in the
read only model, because if,
depending on the automobile, Interesting
that that's kind of like
a, a, a non database
specific view. Like I might
have customer orders and customer
details. And then in SQL
server, I might, in the
old, in the old times
made a customer order detail
view that I would then
use and then apply to
a view. And then, yes.
Okay. So then you're talking
about putting that in the,
in the model itself and
then generating that. So then
someone could choose to consume
that model or that view
model. Now that read only
model rather than consuming the
more direct data access model.
Yes. And you can also
have been think about a,
shall I store it in
a no SQL database for
you automatically and keep the
things in sync by generate
some help account for you
or additionally, add some service
code for you so you
can enable it via API.
For example, I've worked on
a large, a lot of
large enterprise applications and sometimes,
and this is, this is
a little bit jaded. Sometimes
I feel like the app
spends most of its time,
just moving data from one
format to another kind of,
and not just once or
twice, but like three or
four times as it makes
its way through the system.
And then you ask yourself,
what exactly does this application
do? So my question is
how, how, how important is
it to have a data
access layer and a business
objects layer and all these
different layers of layers of
layers from repository to data,
access to data data, as
it moves its way when
you're just doing text boxes
over data in a web
application. Well, if it clutters
your view on what you're
really doing, and I think,
well, it's it, it's not
really helping, but if you
can abstract away functionality that
that's all otherwise complex to,
to comprehend, then I think
adding another layer is good
because you can focus on,
on that layer only to
solve the problem at hand.
I'm not always a fan
of what's common these days
that you have, for example,
a data access model in
code, and you'll have a
few, a few model somewhere
else, yet another model in
your JVs, Yama, the code
on the client is always
model for data in model,
in model, in model. And
you all, you have to
keep everything up to date
when you change one, for
example, the source model. So
I think when you were
doing three or four models
in a chain for getting
data from one place to
another, I think it's a
bit overly complex, but I
also think it's, it depends
on the application at hand
and of course development teams.
I mean, you can have
split development teams per layer.
So one, one team works
with one model and the
other team works with another
model, which is maybe a
subset. If you have an
abstract, you know, entity model
like you've got, and whether
it be in your product
or whether someone has gone
and created an abstract in
any model, I used to
make them an XML and
do a lot of cogeneration
and roll your own kind
of an example. You can
generate a data access later,
you can generate business objects,
you can generate SQL, you
can generate stored procs how
much generation should you, should
you go with, could you
potentially start generating angular and
client side JavaScript models? Now
that I have this abstract
stuff? Yeah. It's no problem
with fellow nation and all
on the pro on the
properties embedded just one click
away. And you do that
now. No, but I can
add it in a request
though, just a template. It's
just the template. Okay. So
this is a really, this
is a really useful point.
So I'm trying to understand
your philosophy. I mean, in
the process, we'll, I'll understand
the product, but I'm more
interested in the philosophy because
you've got that kind of
authoritative abstract data model. And
when I said something that
I thought was an impressive
and revolutionary idea, like couldn't
you generate and you're like,
of course it's just a
template. So ultimately you, you,
everything comes from this core,
abstract authoritative source, and you
can generate whatever you want
to generate. Yeah, because the,
what you generated are just
projections from the model in
a, to a different form.
And the model is not
something that comes falling out
of the sky. It's really
the modeling of NC definitions.
You see in the domain,
for example, if you have
to write a software product
for a shoe factory, they
have customers, they have materials
and they have designs for
shoes. All those kinds of
things are really abstract entity
definitions. And you can create
a model from that or
multiple models. And they form
relationships with each other and
inheritance, and they have properties
like which are called attributes.
And that mobile alone, you
can project to different forums.
Like I can project it
to code and I can
protect it through relational database
models, but it can also
projected through a no SQL
database or to a service.
It's just a projection I
can define on that abstract
model. And as soon as
I defined a projection, I
can generate go to with
it. Doesn't that put a
lot of responsibility though, on
your abstract model? I mean,
it certainly has a lot
of responsibilities. It knows a
lot about the database. It
knows a lot about data
types. It knows a lot
about lengths and constraints, and
now it starts knowing about
business objects. And it knows
about a database. For example,
a database string length might
be different from a client
side string length. I mean,
ideally it wouldn't, but you
know, things are different that
puts a lot of pressure
on this abstract model. Yes,
that's true. And then it's,
it's hard not to fall
into the pitfall where you
have just one source for
information, for everything, and even
application like the various tools
on the market, where you
can just define a data
model and you can generate
from the database through the
UI from it. So what
I have currently is the
abstract model with the mapping
definitions and in relation to
model data and the cogeneration.
But on top of that
obstruction model, I can AppSec
mobile. I can define different
models, which are projections from
the AppSec model, but again
are just the model. And
for example, I can define
a model for the client
side, which has, for example,
different string lengths. Art doesn't
have string because it, the
target for that model is
not something.net and a projection
from one model to the
other is what my tool
should do for you. So
the new model that's defined
on the abstract model then
can be used as a
source for generation, for client
side, JavaScript, for example, I
see. So if I'm understanding
correctly, there is an abstract
model, but then there can
also be models of models.
I mean, you can chop
off a piece of this
and then create another view
on top of that. That
is a different model. And
then from that generate. Yeah,
I see. So then perhaps
that secondary model could have
more, more context, more information,
more attributes that are specific
to the problem. So the
closer it gets to the
user, the more it looks
like, what the user expects,
the user being the client
of the Yes, and that
Pacific bark models of models
is what I'm researching right
now for the future versions
of LVL 10, because you
have at, at one moment,
you realize you have built
everything except the email. So
yeah, that's left for our
mapping is yeah. Yeah. You
have entities, you have classes,
you have tables and the
mappings between them and everything
works and what's left well,
there's a lot left, but
it's all built on top
of that basis. So that's
what I'm researching right now.
That models, project, which are
projected from the abstract model
is, is one route into
the future for, for my
work. Do you think though,
that the, that the kind
of the rise of document
databases where someone can just
pay, take some Jason and
throw it into a, a
database will eventually kill the
relational database? Or do you
think the relational database is
just so much more optimized
because of things like strong
typing and transactions that, that
the document databases and no
SQL databases and things like
that will never, Well, I
think each database forum has
a strong points and weak
points. And I mean, you
use just one database database
form for everything in your
application, you will run into
the negative side of the
database forum. You've chosen one
way or the other. When
you choose the document database,
you will sooner or later
run into the aspect that
eventually consistency is something you
have to solve in your
application code. It's not something
that will be solved by
the database you've chosen. So
when you choose a relational
database and you scale out
to a lot of servers,
you suddenly run into the
situation that you cannot do
very efficient transactions across those
servers without a lot of
costs. So how to solve
that? I think it's, especially
the coming years, four years,
four or five years, I
think it's that developers more
and more will choose different
forms of databases for different
parts of their application. So
the line of business, transactional
ordering systems will likely be
still on relational databases, but
other parts of the application,
which can use more Ritani
database, more read only data
will, for example, move to
a no SQL database. But
you see also now more
and more research in the
no SQL corner where you
have a no SQL databases
with, for asset compliance, like
hyperdecks are full DB. Those
are databases with no sequel
aspects. Good. They, you can
fully use them in an
asset style, like a relational
database. So I don't know
they will be useful in
every application, but there are
still, there are more and
more choices on the market,
but I still think that
relational database will, will keep
their, their part of their
share of the market. It
will just be a little
less than they have now,
because most developers will simply
choose, well, we use a
relational database because of DBA
CESO, or I know that
it will work and that's
all, maybe that group will
go have approval of a
string, but I don't think
the no sequel databases will
kill them. I mean, in
89 I started university at
89 and my roommate was
graduating on object databases that's
so many years ago. And
they still aren't the choice
in foremost for most, No,
I was going to say
it seems to me like
one of the funny things
that people forget about around
relational databases is how it
has kept organizations apart. Like
I recently, I recently spoke
at a kind of quote,
unquote, large enterprise and like
literally the database people sat
on one side of the
room and they, they, they
clearly don't hang out together.
They don't, they don't have
a, they don't have a
relationship, whether it be cordial,
like let's have lunch, or,
I mean, literally if you
want a stored proc filled,
you know, create a, you
fill out some kind of
a form and you ask
for it and then you
wait. And I think that
those things have made people
hate relational databases, those organizational
issues, more than the technical
issues. Oh, absolutely. I don't
know if you remember using
it, the newsgroups, there were
a lot of database oriented
news groups, for example. And
if you ask the question
where, Oh, I, I generate
some dynamics equal and I,
and I have a problem
with that query and you
were totally killed there by
all kinds of store procedure
warriors, which said, one thing
only keep everything inside the
database, business, logic, data, Xs
logic, no matter what everything
should be in the database.
And I think that with
that strong opinion about databases,
which are mostly DBA, is
because it's their territory and
they have responsibility about the
server from developer ruins, everything
it's their fault. So they
are protecting their kingdom with,
with if is a lot
of nit. And I think
that will, will stay on
until someone says inside that
organization, well, we work for
the same team and you
have to help each other,
but until then it will
be water and fire, I
think yet. Yeah. Or, or
oil and water. It's definitely
a problem. And hopefully, you
know, tools, better tools, better
understanding and more, hopefully more
authoritative models will cause those
barriers to break down because
there's no reason that, that
our relational database can't be
as agile as throwing a
document into a blob. No,
no, of course not. It's
just that. Well, but a
lot of developers forget is
that starting a project is
easy when you have an
empty database and you, Jane's
a couple of fields in
a database of an entity
and say, Hey man, I
have to have three new
fields in that table. The
ones that's in production. And
there's a lot of data
in, in a database changing
something like splitting a table
isn't trivial. So the guy
who has to do that
has to write scripts and
tests and maybe pull an
all nighter to get it
working. And the developer who
is requesting it has to
make a strong point to
get that change through. And
I think that that's reasonable
because the, the, the work
to make a change is
so many more, so much
bigger than when you are
developing with empty database before
release for your application. So
I think a lot of
developers forget how much changes,
how much work a single
change can be in a
production database, for example. And
on the other hand, the
DBA forgets how much trouble
it will be if he
or she doesn't make a
change to a data base
quickly. So the development team
has to wait for, for
a change on a table
or change on a relationship.
Yeah. Ultimately I think that
agility is the thing that's
going to define the technologies
of the future. I talk
to people about the cloud
and I say, you know,
you don't need to fax
your it department to get
a virtual machine. Like, that's,
that's just criminal you, if
you need to get your
job done, the other team
that's standing in your way
is, is on the same
team. Right. Your job is
to get the business done.
So work with that team.
And it's just as criminal
to make someone wait a
week for a stored procedure
or a view. Yeah, absolutely.
That that's that that's ridiculous.
Yeah. Well, thanks so much
for chatting with me today,
France. Okay. We'll put links
to Francis blog, his Twitter
and his product, LLP L
gen pop on the show
notes. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes and
see you again next week.